---
layout: post
title: Data classes
---

A new thing Kotlin introduces over many other languages like `Java` is the `data class`. In Java (and many other languages) we often make a class with

* getters - read data
* setters - change the value of data
* `toString()` - convert the object to a string
* `toHashCode()` - get a numeric unique value representing the object
* `equals()` - check if two objects are equal
* `copy()` - copy objects

This is often 20-30 lines of template code added to the start of almost every class and often copy pasted or generated by an IDE. Long and similar looking repetitive code can often lead to bugs so Kotlin offers a way of avoiding the problem entirely by just adding one word `data` before the start of a class.

```kotlin
data class Hero(val name: String, val type: String, var healthPoints: Int) {
    [...]
}
```

Just adding that lets us do a lot.

### Creating Objects

Creating objects is the same as normally dealing with classes in Kotlin. 

The generated `toString()` gives a pretty good default print that is useful for debugging.

```kotlin
val hero1 = Hero("Harsh", "Mage", 100)
println(hero1) // get a nice print
// => Hero(name=Harsh, type=Mage, healthPoints=100)
```

### Getters and Setters

You can access variables via the dot `.variableName` notation. To set things you use the `.variableName =` syntax.

```kotlin
println(hero1.healthPoints) // get values
// => 100
hero1.healthPoints = 80 // set values (var only)
println(hero1) 
// => Hero(name=Harsh, type=Mage, healthPoints=80)
```

### Equality

Kotlin sets up things nicely that `==` works for comparing object's values. 

```kotlin
val hero2 = Hero("Amirtha", "Warrior", 100)
println(hero1 == hero2) // => false
val hero3 = Hero("Harsh", "Mage", 80)
println(hero1 == hero3) // => true
```

In a lot of other languages `==` will only compare the reference of the object, that is if they're the same in memory but not by values. Often that's not what we really want because that just means checking two variables are the same, so in Java you'd have to create an `equals()` function to actually compare the object's values.

### Destructure

Using comma seperated multiple declaration we can extract variables out of an object very easily.

```kotlin
val (name, type, hp) = hero2
println(name) // => Amirtha
```

### Copy

Kotlin also makes it really nice to copy over variables and even change a few values.

```kotlin
val mageVarshini = hero2.copy(type = "Mage")
println(mageVarshini)
// => Hero(name=Varshini, type=Mage, healthPoints=100)
```

## See More

* [Data Classes - CS 199 IKP](https://kotlin.cs.illinois.edu/lessons/data_classes/)

* [Data Classes - Official Docs](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/data-classes.html)

* [Koltin Data Classes - Baeldung](https://www.baeldung.com/kotlin-data-classes)
